José María Garza. Yes. And where was he born? He
didn't return to Vieja García. In what year? 1906.
And when did he live in Ateas? In 1914. And for what
reason? For the revolution. Ah, yes. And tell me
more about the revolution in these days, please.
Well, before that date when we came here, when we
lived in Vieja García, My father was in charge
there. And when the revolutionaries came in, they
came with the... He was in charge there. And to give
them reason where there was corn, food, whatever.
And they went and looted
everything. And at that time, at about two or three
o'clock, those revolutionaries came out and the
federals came in. They were from the government.
After a while, they were thrown out of the
billiards and the billiardsmen came in. After a
while, a bandit from Tolentino came in with
people. And that's when the federalists came in
again, the trebadores from La Huerta. There was a
day when the money changed every two hours. It was
so cheap, it was worth a kind of money. It was in
paper, billiards that they named it. Some bills in
pesos, in cincos. In half an hour it was worth a
coin, in half an hour another, and it was like that.
And there were dead people hanging there. They
were carried in carts. They were dodged like
dodging firewood. And there, on the riverbank,
they made a well for them, they called it the
caracol. There they just lit the yunta and emptied
them to the dead. There they were carried.
And that's when he took... Francisco could not get
out via Nicamole and Nacataz. There is a stream of
the Cerro del Fraile that goes all the way here, all
the way to Mediación, via Gacía, via Gacía's
plains. And they used it as a fence, the billets.
And from there, from Sierra Madre, another came.
It was just a river, a stream, and they couldn't get
out of sight. General Alfonso Vázquez came and
started to bring people in. As he was in charge,
they were gathering. They were from the
government who were coming that day. They were
there for three days, and when they had parking
spaces in black boxes, that was the park, they
would come in and accommodate him there. At three
in the morning, they gave orders to throw
Francisco Villa there. If he turned back, they
would thrash him. It was a push for a decision. And
they came in at about eight in the morning, and
people started to come out. By ten, they started to
get injured. They brought them home and brought
them to Monterrey. At two in the afternoon,
General Alfonso Vázquez was killed. He was shot
three times. He didn't want to be brought back from
combat. He wanted three captains. When he arrived
in Monterrey, he died. But the people of General
Alfonso Vázquez never came back until Francisco
Villa was thrown out. In the port of... Why did you
explain?
He clarified, part of
your question was, he clarified
that there were
different groups. My father had a lot of corn and
everything. There was whatever they wanted. If
you turned to the other side, they would kill you.
You had to be with them if they wanted to be with us.
Don't go against them. Don't oppose them. Because
there were too many groups. Who were they going to
favor? And so they really were neutral. Right. But
they were the ones that were getting screwed, you
know? Right, right. The machine guns. What kind of
work did your father have before the revolution?
He was a carpenter. He made bagpipes. Morales.
Riatas del azar. carpets, and a lot of other things
that are from Istria. What did you do with them?
From Istria. What was that? Mamey. From Lechuvía.
From Lechuvía. And he was the owner there? He was
the owner. And what did those lands do? They left
them there. They left them there. We also have
lands there. If we don't pay taxes, we have
nothing. And they came to Laredo, Texas. to work in
the bakery. Our older brothers were bakers. Your
older brothers? How did they learn that trade in
Spanish? The trade. The trade. In the bakeries,
dad would put them to work, to teach them. Aunque
les pagaran poquito, pero que aprendieran. He's a
baker by trade also. He's a jack of all trades. Ah, y
así aprendió usted de panadero también. Y
trabajamos en... Ahí en Laredo trabajaron de
panaderos. En 1915. In 1915 we started working in
the panadería El Gallo, in Larero. In Larero. In
Larero. There we worked. His name was Raúl
Ornelas, the owner of the bakery. And one of his
sons was Luque Ornelas. We worked there. And at 17
we came here to Camargo. And from Camargo we moved
here to Rio Grande. To work in the bakery. And my
brothers were teachers. He's got a brother that
lives
in Monterrey,
Mexico. And you came here to the United States,
from Camargo. Yes, from Camargo. They brought us
here. After the Revolution. After the
Revolution. Why did you come to Texas? Because
from here we went to look for Leopoldo Reynaga, who
was a baker. But you had a lot of knowledge here in
Rio Grande, right? Yes, because of the question of
being bakers. And they brought us here so that we
could work there. And why did you stay here in
Texas? Why did your brother Felipe return to
Mexico? But he never lived in Texas. I was working
here in Texas, but because he was a mechanic, any
motor that he heard working, he worked in Peñoles,
in a factory where he was in charge of just
following the engine that was failing, he would
tell them to drive it. But he came back, he
preferred to go to Mexico to stay here. Yes, he did.
Y nosotros, pues, aquí estábamos sacando bien la
vida hasta la fecha. Ya no nos movimos. Trabajé el
25. En 1924, trabajamos
en San Antonio, en la panadería de Jacobo Estrada.
Era una de las mejores panaderías que había. Y ahí
trabajé en Houston. Bueno, usted nació en Villa
García, ¿no? En Villa García.
When was it that the U.S. took, they made the Rio
Grande border, you know, the American border? Oh,
1845. That was in 1845. That was way after the
revolution. So that means that these people, when
they crossed that border, they were actually
crossing into a foreign country. They were
crossing into a foreign country. So, ¿cómo se
quedaban aquí legalmente? Why would the U.S.
government let them do that? I don't know. How did
they cross the border without the American
government telling them? We crossed in Laredo and
they just pointed us out. That's the date. They
were just right on us. They were just right on us.
That's the date. And then when we came here, we came
here, they charged us with passports. And when
they arrived, they charged us with passports. We
went through the bridge with permission. They
took our passports. And then when the $8 passports
arrived, we took them out. Everyone took out their
passports. The first time they crossed? You, when
you crossed? There wasn't. There wasn't? There
wasn't a passport. You crossed in 1903? Yes. And
there wasn't a passport? There wasn't
immigration? Yes, the reason why we were
registered. Ah, they would just record. Ah, they
just wrote the names of the people. They didn't
write anything. And they were registered there.
Did it stay there? There was no limit to how long
they could stay here. There was no limit. The years
went by. When did the American government require
the registration? Around 1918. So what did they
do? When the American government demanded
that... The passports were $10. They
could have stayed here in the United States for as
long as they wanted.
Right, that's what... In fact, there weren't even
closed checks a lot of places. A lot of places you
just walked across and nobody even asked you to
sign your name. Like I say, the people that lived
here, the people that lived there were the same
people. Right, right. And the border was
absolutely big. In fact, it was up in the 20s that
the first real... close checks began to be made,
and it wasn't until about 1930 or in the early 30s
that there was any officially enforced
close-ups. That's when she found out that she was
an American citizen, when they started enforcing
it. In the 1930s. Right. She was going to go get her
official citizenship, and she said, you're
already a citizen. What year were you married? The
first time. In 1924. A woman from here or from
Mexico? From here. From the United States? From
the United States. What was her name? Maria
Aguirre. And she was from Texas? She was from
Texas. She was from Texas? Yes. And here in Rio
Grande. How did her family come here to Rio Grande?
We lived here. We lived here. I don't know. They
probably emigrated in the same conditions. My
husband lived over there
in Rivera. He lived over there in Rivera. It was
Rivera. Well, sir, tell
me a little more about life here in the United
States. Could it be that you were kidnapped again?
What? Well, tell me a little more about your life
here in the United States. Well, here in the United
States I've had a good time. I've always worked.
Yes. And we, as we had a bakery office, they came to
take us from various places. Once, they took me to
El Cauce, to San Juan, to Quinisville, to... San
Antonio also took me to Dílete, or Mílete, how is
San Antonio? Dílete, yes, or Mílete, it's over
there. Two little places, there's Cotula too.
There have always been better jobs than on the
other side. We knew how to work in the bakery, and we
still had the fame of bakers, because we were
bakers, and we still are.
¿Y de ahí se divorció usted y de ahí se volvió a
casar?
Sí. My wife is his daughter from the second wife. ¿Y
cuánto se casaba la segunda vez? Cuarenta y cinco.
¿Cuarenta y cinco? Sí. ¿Y en qué pueblo? Aquí en Río
Grande. ¿En Río Grande? En Río Grande. ¿Para
cuántos años vivía usted en Río Grande? That's 73
and 63. In 56 years. But he was talking
about living
all these
other different places. He's very old. Wow. He
wasn't gone for long, you know, just two or three
months. This
is from a temple
rock. A temple rock in the
pot. Ah, yes, I understand. You understand? Yes.
It took me a month to work. To work. Yes, to work. And
all the time, the work class is in the bakery? In the
bakery and... In the court. Carpentry and... In
the court. In the what? In the court. Court? What
does the court give you? Work. Work in the county.
The same, carpentry, cleaning, and... Several
jobs, a little bit. I know a little bit of
everything. I'm also a plumber.
Because I've liked learning a little bit of
everything. Yes. But my profession is a baker. A
baker, yes. Because I worked in Hebron. In 1932, I
worked in the bakery. Were you married to my uncle?
No. He didn't get married until 1945.
And for what reason did you never come back to
Mexico? Well, I had a good time here. My parents
were close by in Camargo. So... Working here is
good. But I liked it better here. So you come here
and live well. My husband died at the age of 79. He
didn't go to jail. That's
what I,
you know, I work in the hospital.
We're very interested in health and longevity.
And I'd like to explain to my son how that has been to
live so many years. His whole family has lived
extremely well. And we have both sides of our
families. And I can't understand how come we don't
make it.
You know, natural selection. the infant
mortality was probably very high. Although it
varied with families even then. And you, in the
families that you had, since you all had big
families, what was the percentage of children
that died in childhood? Of our families? Well, we
were 17 families. The family that I was in was 17.
It's just like, I used to
live in El Paso and the tribe, the Indian tribe, the
natives that live there are the Tarahumara. And
I've read some articles that have been written on
them. Sanitation
is very poor. The infant mortality is extremely
high, but the people that survive, they all live to
be 100 years old. So that's why I say it's natural
selection, survival of the fittest. Well,
there's always been a fallacy about the
increasing lifespan, because even in very
primitive societies, anybody who survived
infancy and then you bring in children, men have no
warfare, which is fairly typical of most. And
there does seem
to be a very strong genetic component. My father
was 79. The only reason he died young at 79 is that he
drank a lot. That's true. You drink yourself to
death at 79. His sister died. When did my aunt
Felipa die? My aunt Felipa died last year. She was
100 years old. for his older sister.
But they were very active physically.
They had to. They had to be active physically or
they would starve to death.
We're not, that's one of our biggest problems.
We're not very active. I am, but I mean, the most
people
aren't. Are you drinking water
from
there? Yes. There we can see Cerrito's grave. So
they
would take the young men, they would just draft
them, literally draft them into the...
It sounded like in those days in the church, when
they put stones on a brick and turned it over. They
were very, definitely very hard done. I guess I
would have done this. You know, I would say, I
always used to, I used to tell my other
grandfather, I said, you should just stay there
and fight. They had nothing to fight for.
Yesterday, in Cerritos, a lot of dead stones were
seen. There were revolutionaries
who caught a boss, tied him up in a post or in mules.
The Soltán, who left. All of them were the same,
right? The Caracistes, the Cerarabas, were the
same? All of them were revolving. At that time,
they fought each other. There were many bandits,
many people who stood up with people. Like
Sorrentino, a bandit who stood up. And others who
stood up with others. Even if they were the same,
they would enter the town and say, let's be
villagers. And they would come back and be the same
as they were. There was a problem in Vietnam. You
couldn't tell who the enemy was. They all looked
alike. They killed cows and gave them to the people
and ate them. Hey,
Ella, come here. This is like one of my older
sisters. How do you do? Really? You've been
studying? Excuse me, let me go in. Oh, were
you sitting over here?
Oh, I'm tired. Let me switch this off.
You know, we have kids who come from Mexico. And
boy, you know that they have it much better off
here. They come out here without nothing. And in
fact, there's two families right here. I bet you
one of them hasn't been here one year. They've
already built their own home, something they've
never had before. And her brother-in-law is...
Well, they've been here just about 60 months. They
haven't yet. But they sure do. It's going to get
much easier here. What do you think?
It's a more advanced
system. But now there's a lot of opportunity in
Mexico,
right? What do you think about the revolution now?
Will it be good or bad for Mexico? Well, right now I
don't know if it will be good or bad. I feel like I'm
permanent. I'm asking, if there had never been
that revolution, in what state would Mexico be
right now? It would be very good. Better or worse?
Better. Better than how it is now? Better than how
it is now. Is it because of the revolution? In life,
which is better in Mexico now, do you think it's
because of the revolution or not? Well, in those
times it was because of the revolution and the bad
administration of the government.
Yes. Well, the revolution was necessary. Well, it
would be, it wouldn't be, but the revolution was
made out of envy of the presidency.
They used to have revolution
after
revolution. They had a hundred in a row. The word
revolution used to be synonymous with the word
Mexico. They all wanted to be president and the
only way they could become president was to have a
revolution and throw off the other government.
He said the
important thing is that she came
over here because
of that. . No, but
not even your mom was happy here. Not even your mom,
right? And the older families weren't happy here.
They didn't talk about coming back either. Yes.
Why? What was it that they were interested in? Hey
ma'am, and when you got here to Rio Grande, where
did you sit? Did you rent a house or what? Temporary
lodging.
Temporary
lodging until they got on their feet. This was set
up by the American government during the
revolution. That's why they were in the army post.
Well, Freddy,
but they do the same thing now with the people
coming from Mexico. Yes, the Cuban. All right,
take the Cuban. And they, too, have the dream of
going back to Cuba. That's their dream. But look,
the people that are coming from Mexico, like these
people that come, they come here on Saturday,
Monday, they're on free lunch, on welfare aid, and
see, they get all their benefits. Now, they don't
provide homes now. In fact, now they're asking
them that they must have a home. Before they can
come home. But why does the U.S. government do
that? It doesn't make any sense. I think it's
humanity wanting to to help other humans. I think
they look at them as just humans, not as Mexicans.
Well, why do they do it for Cuba? The Cubans. This is
a good government. This is a good government that
helps its soldiers who come from Spain. But
wouldn't Mexico do the same thing? I don't think
so. I wouldn't say there's a better retired
Mexican. No, but to help an American who was
already expatriated for some reason, looking for
a better life, don't you think you would want to
help him? Yes, he admits it all the time. But to help
him with food and coffee. Not to help the same
people. If you look at the Mexican government when
it comes to a politician, for example, a man who
goes through politics, through war, they receive
him. The government receives him and gives him
protection. But a bandolero, just to go, because I
liked to wear a bandolero, no. Not anywhere, not
here. No, it's what I said. But correctly, yes. Any
government of any kind, I know they have given them
protection and they give it wherever they want.
The same here as there. Because here I was once, if a
revolutionary came from there for the war, there
they were in the house of... We worked in the bakery
and we would bring them food at night. They would
come running from there. And then the
administration came and protected them. But
don't you think, Chema, that if you come back with
your family... Don't you think that you could...
You have workers. You're going to have... I have
good people wherever they want to protect me. No,
no. But it could be a life almost the same as the one
here, when you start working with your children.
Yes. Why not? I say yes. I also say yes. The worker
wherever he wants to live, he does well. But you're
saying that... The worker wherever he wants to
live, he does well. The worker wherever he wants to
live, he does well.
The worker wherever he wants to live, he does well.
The worker wherever he wants We see the jumps.
But there may be nothing wrong with that way of
life. Well, maybe not, but that's why you get more
money. Most of the Mexican cities now, I would say,
there's a very strong sense of what the sonchises
are doing. Well, yes, because they have learned it
from here. Now, we traveled into Mexico last
summer. And we were in Guanajuato, and there was a
little boy there, I would say, between five and
seven. That kid was smart, but you could tell that
he was among the poorest there. You know, and I told
my children, we had a guide with us, and I told my
children, you know, it's a shame that such a bright
child may never have the opportunity to become
president here in Mexico, while in the United
States he might have. And the guide said, oh, yes,
they do. He said, oh, yes, we have some poor now come
up. They have to get up and go. And I said, well, I
don't think that has been the picture of Mexico.
Because the haves have always been the haves. And
the have-nots are the have-nots. And a have will
not let a have-not go up the ladder. And he said,
well, that picture is changing very rapidly. And
then he told us his own life story. What was his last
story? Well, that he had been a had-not. He said, I
came down from the mountains, and I had enough
intelligence to want to do something for myself. I
left my family back there. I came over here, this
family, this family, evidently with more money.
It took me in when they found out that I had it up
here. He said, and they have given me this life. And
he was, of course, going to college, and he was
studying either to be a doctor or something big.
And I said, really? You know, I asked the question.
I said, really? He said, oh, yeah, there's a lot of
cases like this. And he showed us. He said, they
come down from those mountains, and there will be
people here that will be willing to help. They
don't seem to think so. Or he didn't seem to think
so. We have slums in this country. But they don't
compare to the slums they have down there. They are
slums, you know, they are slums. Ooh, like that's
the Barrio Independencia from Monterey, which is
not so far. It's worse in Monterey than it is in
Guadalupe. I think it's because Monterey has been
attracting such a large number of people who are
unskilled from the country side. And they linger
around the edges of Monterey. There's no way to
absorb it. So you see, yes, I'd say that the value of
incandescent in Monterey is probably wonderful,
but I've never been.
I'm Ella Montemayor, and I am Mrs. Medina's
daughter. I have been asked what made us get out of
being the migrant family that we used to be. My
mother and father had a large family. He was a
migrant worker. But I have always said that it was
this foresight that my mother had that we had to get
out of this way of living. And so she, they had a high
emphasis on education. And she would stay home
with the children, and my dad would go, and she
would just try to make live with whatever he sent.
And well, we're not, not any of us are really
wealthy. But we all, at least, we're all stay in
school, and our children have an opportunity to
stay in school. I don't know. And why do you feel
your mother had this drive? I don't know. I think it
was in her. I mean, some people have it. That's the
only way I can see it. Some people have it, and some
people... It's an inner drive. I don't know. I
don't know. We always tell her that we think that we
all inherited from her. But... Because I see it in
school children. There are some parents that just
don't have it. No matter how much we try to tell
them. They feel that the way they're living is
perfect. And you're now a schoolteacher. Yes. In
fact, there's at least eight or ten within the
family. I'm a schoolteacher. My husband's a
schoolteacher. My brother's a schoolteacher. My
sister-in-law's a schoolteacher. My sister. I
have two, a brother and a sister. They're
schoolteachers in MacAllen. We've all, well
practically all of us, of course now like mother
says, her ambition was to have doctors and
lawyers. But when you're climbing up, you just
can't skip. The next thing for us was education.
And so we all got into an education field. Now I tell
my children, now of course they can have an
ambition to become a doctor or a lawyer, because
now they have had better opportunities than what I
had. I came from a home where no English was spoken.
So mother could not help us. And they have had a much
better opportunity. We do a lot of traveling.
They've been exposed to a lot more than what we
could have done. We had to do it practically on our
own. Of course, it was her drive. I think because, I
don't know, and daddy was very willing to go along
with her idea. How much of the year was he usually
gone? Oh, I would say not more than six months.
Because he didn't know how to write. And so the
communication was very little. And so he had to
come and see his family pretty often. Or else, you
know, a whole year would go by and he really
wouldn't know. So he tried to make it. I wouldn't
say that he'd be gone more than six months. Three to
six months. And your mother never would go and take
you? Never. She probably went. Well, in fact, I
think she went until the older ones were ready to
start school. She followed him. My oldest sister,
my grandmother, took her in so she wouldn't miss.
And then as soon as my oldest brother was old enough
to go to school, then she stayed. And from then on,
it was a family stay. Father went. But we were
never, the family was never, now I could say I went
one year, but that was because I wanted to go. I
wanted to see what it was like. And I went my junior
year in high school. That's when I went to try it. We
went during the summer. What was it like? Oh, I came
back and I thought, mother, never. This is one
thing I'll never do. I just stay home and go to
school. And I think she emphasized that a lot when
we were going to school. And we came from a family
where most of us had perfect attendance because
she emphasized it a lot. If you don't go to school,
you're going to end up going with your daddy to the
fields. And we all knew that that was rough out
there in the sun. And some families now do not see it
like that. To them, it's a joy to go, to leave school
and go. I don't know why. I think it's because we're
pushing. No, and I still tell them, I pass by a
field, and I'm like, oh, God, I'm glad we got out of
there. And I tell my kids, that's one of the
roughest things to do. You cannot see how anybody,
not even for all the money in the world, doesn't
want to go and work on the fields. And, you know, the
living conditions. I just can't see it.